Right.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
We have a microphone and everything and a red light
NOTE CONF
so we can get started.
Is this microphone working?
NOTE CONF
It sounds like it's echoing enough.
Um, so.
NOTE CONF
Ha!
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Welcome back.
There is another week of linear algebra.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is a lot of reading this week.
I am aware it's a whole chapter.
NOTE CONF
It's big, but hopefully most of it is not too
new.
NOTE CONF
Have most people seen factory stuff before?
I'm getting lots of nods.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay, so, um, today might be a bit of general
NOTE CONF
revision for lots of you.
Um, it might be entirely new, and that's fine.
NOTE CONF
We're still going over it.
Um, but hopefully it's a bit less intense than it
NOTE CONF
maybe has been, particularly after last week.
So, um, I am going to get rid of the
NOTE CONF
the login attendance code.
So if you've not logged into your attendance, you have
NOTE CONF
to use the code written on the board.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So the homework was released this morning.
The homework 303 was released this morning.
NOTE CONF
Um, it is due next Wednesday.
So that covers last week.
NOTE CONF
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
And this week, vectors and planes.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that's that.
Um, and I don't actually think there's any other announcements.
NOTE CONF
It's kind of.
We're in Thursday's lecture.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay, so let us get started.
NOTE CONF
True or false?
If you have two nonzero vectors in r, n, um,
NOTE CONF
the coordinate tips, also known as the coordinates of the
vectors themselves.
NOTE CONF
Do they have to be the same?
If you have two nonzero vectors, they are equal to
NOTE CONF
the coordinate.
Tips have to be the same.
NOTE CONF
I am going to wait until we have at least
50% voting.
NOTE CONF
People are still logging on, so have a chat.
Let's see what we think.
NOTE CONF
It's wet.
Oh, look how it's wet.
NOTE CONF
I guess my shoes.
Were doing quite well.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so I'm going to give you another 10s.
See what people think.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So let us have a look at this.
We seem fairly divided between true and false.
NOTE CONF
So if you have two nonzero vectors at the same,
do the caution tips have to be the same?
NOTE CONF
Um, let's have a look at some comments.
Is that not the definition of a vector?
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
Uh, it's not false.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look at false.
Tips don't have to be the same direction.
NOTE CONF
Length vector can be translated from the origin, but is
still equal.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to start from the same position.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So there were some other things.
Some of the comments we've had.
NOTE CONF
Um so let's try again.
Turn to your neighbour, have a quick conversation.
NOTE CONF
Uh, try and convince your neighbour one way or another.
What are you thinking?
NOTE CONF
And then we're going to have another vote.
I don't think.
NOTE CONF
So.
No no no no.
NOTE CONF
Stop!
This.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'm going to give you another 15 seconds.
Let's see if we can get over half of people
NOTE CONF
voting.
What are we thinking?
NOTE CONF
True or.
False?
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's have another five.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so we seem to have some of you who
NOTE CONF
have been convincing.
We seem to have moved slightly.
NOTE CONF
Um, we've gone from a kind of 5050 split to
a 3 to 1 split, which is movement.
NOTE CONF
Um, but that still doesn't quite seem to be consensus.
So let us let us see what we've got.
NOTE CONF
The chords of the vector of the quarter of that
vector starting in the origin.
NOTE CONF
So if x equals y then x I equals y.
Um, because the vectors are equal, the vectors are equal.
NOTE CONF
That is, that is the point.
Um, what are those people saying?
NOTE CONF
We've got a lot more common to it.
Only length and direction need to be equal.
NOTE CONF
The condition is not sufficient for them to have the
same tip, the direction that matters, not the coordinates.
NOTE CONF
I've had a slightly busy morning for the person who's
interested.
NOTE CONF
Uh, same direction, length of that equal tale.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So does somebody want to add to anything there any
other thing that they think I'm massively convincing?
NOTE CONF
This is why it's got to be true.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Why do you say that?
Because of the tip of the vectors are equals.
NOTE CONF
Uh, don't you have to move both vectors so.
That they start at the origin?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Uh, well, no.
NOTE CONF
So if we think about when we talk about coordinate
tips, we're talking about I have a vector, I have
NOTE CONF
a tip and I have a you can't see.
That's a good point.
NOTE CONF
So I have some vector I have a tip I
have a tail Um, it is not true that your
NOTE CONF
tail has to be at the origin.
So bearing in mind your tale doesn't have to be
NOTE CONF
the origin, does anyone?
Does that change anyone's mind?
NOTE CONF
What are we thinking now?
Are those two vectors the same or different?
NOTE CONF
The same?
Same.
NOTE CONF
Anyone think different?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
They are indeed the same.
So they have different tails and tips, but they have
NOTE CONF
the same length and the same direction.
And that is all that matters for vector.
NOTE CONF
Um, you just want the same length.
And pointing in the same direction.
NOTE CONF
So actually this is a much more general definition.
Actually, I appreciate most of you.
NOTE CONF
You've probably seen this before, but let's just take a
moment to think about this.
NOTE CONF
So so you know, U and V are the same,
but also W is the same and W is over
NOTE CONF
here where there were no coordinates.
Uh, let's see if I can do this.
NOTE CONF
Vector A is the same as UV and W.
That is not even that is definitely not got any
NOTE CONF
coordinates.
That's on a completely different sheet of paper.
NOTE CONF
In fact, uh, let's take this a step further.
Now I have to line this up.
NOTE CONF
This vector.
Isn't the same.
NOTE CONF
This vector is the same as all of those vectors,
but it's moving around.
NOTE CONF
There are no coordinates.
It's just a vector in space.
NOTE CONF
Which is why vectors are so useful, actually, because you
do not need to have coordinates and you don't always
NOTE CONF
have coordinates.
You don't always have numbers.
NOTE CONF
I'm sorry for those of you who came to study
university maths, hoping to do lots of calculations, but there
NOTE CONF
aren't that many numerical calculations.
Um, I appreciate that we've just done eigenvalues and eigenvectors
NOTE CONF
for a week, which were long numeric calculations.
Um, but that's not always true.
NOTE CONF
And actually vectors are one of these things we generalise.
So for example, lots of the research I do is
NOTE CONF
in tangent spaces to weird and wonderful wacky surfaces that
don't actually exist in three space or even Euclidean space.
NOTE CONF
And we can't put numbers on them because that makes
no sense.
NOTE CONF
But I can still work with vectors.
So vectors are wonderful because you can do loads of
NOTE CONF
fun stuff with them and you don't need numbers.
All you need is them to have the same length
NOTE CONF
in the same direction.
And you need one other rule.
NOTE CONF
You need to know how they how they how you
combine them so we can add them.
NOTE CONF
By what number haven't I got?
I've not got x the tip to tail rule, which
NOTE CONF
sounds like a very kind of nursery rhyme maths rule,
but actually applies all applies way beyond numbers.
NOTE CONF
Um, you can always add vectors by moving them tip
to tail and then adding them up.
NOTE CONF
So this is going to be w plus x.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone have any questions comments thoughts on any of
that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah all that matters is length and direction.
So bearing that in mind, I appreciate this.
NOTE CONF
May give some of you flashbacks to school, in which
case I mildly apologise.
NOTE CONF
Um, yes, it is false.
That is probably worth doing.
NOTE CONF
The answer is false.
It is not true.
NOTE CONF
Um.
The caution tips do not need to be the same
NOTE CONF
coordinates.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So I appreciate this.
May give some of you flashbacks, to which I mildly
NOTE CONF
apologise.
Uh, but let's try matching the following.
NOTE CONF
So we have a hexagon with two vectors defined A
and B.
NOTE CONF
There are no coordinates here.
There are no numbers.
NOTE CONF
I am not telling you how big this hexagon is.
In fact, it looks very different on both screens.
NOTE CONF
Um, so can you match the following?
Can you find the vector a b?
NOTE CONF
Are we all happy with this notation?
A b with the arrow.
NOTE CONF
It was in the textbook.
It's basically just the fact that starts today and ends
NOTE CONF
a b.
Um, so let's try matching the following.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you've got three vectors.
Four vectors.
NOTE CONF
To find some options.
Feel free to have a bit of a chat.
NOTE CONF
So.
There are just three options.
NOTE CONF
Two of these vectors are actually the same.
So.
NOTE CONF
Worth thinking about.
Okay I'm going to give you another 30s I think
NOTE CONF
until a bit longer for not halfway, but I think
we'll be halfway by then.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Another 10s.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Um, so.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look at this.
Lots of people voted.
NOTE CONF
We seem to have four matches that lots, if you
like.
NOTE CONF
And then.
And then some other matches.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Which is good.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
The vast majority of you are right.
NOTE CONF
Hooray!
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So if we want to kind of just a quick
example.
NOTE CONF
Um, a b is this vector from A to B,
um, which is having based on what we said before,
NOTE CONF
is the going to be the same as each day?
And I can start at a, I can do minus,
NOTE CONF
I start at the point A and go along the
vector A negatively.
NOTE CONF
So it's going to be minus a and then a
long b.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to add on b and I'm going
to have minus a plus b.
NOTE CONF
Or another way of thinking about this is what is
the vector b minus a.
NOTE CONF
Well it's the vector that goes along here.
And then afterwards goes uh, no, it's the vector that
NOTE CONF
goes along here.
And then afterwards goes down there.
NOTE CONF
And that's going to be equivalent O to C is
the same as A, B and D.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we are good with vectors as kind of abstract
things.
NOTE CONF
There's no coordinates with a hexagon.
It's just an abstract line.
NOTE CONF
Um which is nice.
So it means we can do things however we want,
NOTE CONF
um, in whatever space we want and we don't need.
We don't need vectors.
NOTE CONF
I've written here.
We can shake off the shackles of numbers.
NOTE CONF
I was obviously feeling poetic then.
Um, but yes, we're not constrained by our, um, axes.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we have this parallelogram rule, which allows us to
add things, as we saw in that question.
NOTE CONF
We can also just change the direction by taking negative.
I could, uh, double it just by extending it double
NOTE CONF
the length.
All the things we want to happen, happen like we
NOTE CONF
want to.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's move on to a kind of maybe slightly
newer concept, um, which is we were talking about length.
NOTE CONF
So let's talk about how we measure the length.
Um, and this is measured by the norm.
NOTE CONF
So the norm of a vector.
Um, and anyone know how we take the norm of
NOTE CONF
a vector?
What theorem are we essentially using?
NOTE CONF
Pythagoras.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we are Pythagoras using.
So one way of viewing this is is just the
NOTE CONF
square root of the first coordinate squared plus the second
coordinate squared, plus all the way up to however many
NOTE CONF
coordinates we're working in.
And the book talks about our two and our three
NOTE CONF
vectors.
But actually this holds for any size vector, however long
NOTE CONF
your list of numbers is, the length is still just
x one times x two times x one squared plus
NOTE CONF
x two squared plus x three squared.
Um, the other way we can view this is actually
NOTE CONF
as the dot product.
Um and again some people actually take this to be
NOTE CONF
the definition of of the norm.
Instead of saying it's how long our vector is.
NOTE CONF
They say it's the square root of the sum of
the dot product.
NOTE CONF
So bear in mind sometimes that's the definition.
Instead, we actually just have this as a result of
NOTE CONF
theorem 4.2.1.
It's part four of that theorem.
NOTE CONF
Um, that says we can actually just take the dot
product.
NOTE CONF
Um, why is the dot product?
Why are these two equivalent?
NOTE CONF
Why is the dot product the same as Pythagoras using
things?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
If you think about what the dot product is, it's
NOTE CONF
time seeing the first entry of the first vector with
the first entry of the first vector, which is x1
NOTE CONF
times x1, which is x1 squared.
So yeah, we're doing exactly what we're thinking.
NOTE CONF
It's.
Kind of follows from the definition.
NOTE CONF
Um, good.
So here we're doing a bit of Pythagoras.
NOTE CONF
Let's think about some other, uh, trigonometric rules we know.
Um.
NOTE CONF
This one has lots of nice consequences.
Okay, there's my vector A and B.
NOTE CONF
What is this vector going to be?
Anyone want to tell me what my third vector is
NOTE CONF
to close my triangle in terms of a and B?
Good good good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there is my.
NOTE CONF
It's a minus b.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
This is why you should always shout to me when
I make a silly mistake.
NOTE CONF
Um, good.
Okay, so there's a minus B if I have this
NOTE CONF
angle here.
Uh, who again?
NOTE CONF
This is probably something you might have seen before.
The cosine rule.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
Pythagoras corrected for all other triangles, essentially.
NOTE CONF
So, um, let's actually write this in terms of a
minus B uh squared.
NOTE CONF
What is the cosine.
Will then going to tell me what's this equal to.
NOTE CONF
A squared.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Plus b squared.
Good.
NOTE CONF
2AB.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Cause it's the causal.
And then and then cos theta angle there.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's the cosine rule again.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully this is a bit of a vision.
Um but I have written this down wrong.
NOTE CONF
So we two we need the norm of a, we
need the norm of B and then we need cos
NOTE CONF
theta because we want the length of these sides.
Um, so we need the norms okay.
NOTE CONF
So that is shown in the, in the textbook.
And um a slight poof is given, but we actually
NOTE CONF
have a couple of results that are very important that
come from the cosine rule.
NOTE CONF
So the first one is of course sports inequality.
Cauchy is one of those mathematical mathematicians that if you
NOTE CONF
do enough maths, you kind of think, what did he
do?
NOTE CONF
There were so many things named Cauchy something or another.
I think I'll double check this, but I think he's
NOTE CONF
the mathematician with the most things named after him.
Pretty sure that's Cauchy.
NOTE CONF
Um, so lots of things named after him.
Um, and he has this inequality that says the dot
NOTE CONF
product is less than a b, uh, the norm of
A and the norm of B.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone tell me why my vertical lines are different
here?
NOTE CONF
That isn't me being silly.
Um, there is actually meaning there.
NOTE CONF
Y yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
NOTE CONF
So A and B are vectors.
So we need to take the norm of the vectors,
NOTE CONF
whereas HB what type of thing is HB?
It's a scalar.
NOTE CONF
So yeah, I'm taking the absolute value there rather than
a norm.
NOTE CONF
It's not a vector.
So those lines are correct.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're not going to prove Cauchy-Schwarz because that is
NOTE CONF
quite similar to um other things we've seen.
But we are going to prove the triangle inequality which
NOTE CONF
says a plus b.
The norm of a plus B is less than A
NOTE CONF
plus B.
Uh, this is actually proposition 20, proposition 20 in Euclid
NOTE CONF
book one.
So we're going back to like real antiquity maths here
NOTE CONF
and proving something literally in the original textbook.
Um, so this is a very well known, um, inequality.
NOTE CONF
And actually, if you go on and do any other
kind of bits of maths with metric spaces and norms
NOTE CONF
and things like that, the triangle inequality becomes very important.
Um, But the proof of it isn't too tricky.
NOTE CONF
So I thought we could do it together, actually.
And because it uses stuff we've already done.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to leave that up there.
Hopefully.
NOTE CONF
Um, I think about this proof.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What do I need to define?
Do I need to find anything before I get into
NOTE CONF
the meat of this proof?
What are we going to be working with?
NOTE CONF
So anything we don't, we need to tell the reader
exactly what it is a and B.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The only thing is A and B, um, it's given
NOTE CONF
in the theorem.
So, um, some people might say you don't have to
NOTE CONF
write it down again, but let's write it down again.
So let A and B be in RN.
NOTE CONF
So that just means it's a list of n numbers.
It's an n by n vector okay.
NOTE CONF
We then want to um start at the left hand
side and work our way along.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to start with a plus B squared.
Um we'll start with a squared and then we'll show
NOTE CONF
it.
The square root will hold at the end.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any ideas about what I should use there.
NOTE CONF
What does that mean.
The dot product.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So always a good place to start.
NOTE CONF
A proof is with the definition.
So by definition that is what that means.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What can we do next.
NOTE CONF
Expand.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to have a dot a plus B
dot a plus a b plus b b.
NOTE CONF
And that's by I guess theorem 2.2 again.
Properties by properties of the dot product.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anything useful there?
Is a square feet of B square.
NOTE CONF
Good.
And we can collect them.
NOTE CONF
We can collect the middle two terms.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Why can I do that?
What property do they have?
NOTE CONF
It's one that begins with S.
The dot product is what?
NOTE CONF
Symmetric.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So a b equals b a.
It's a nice symmetric thing.
NOTE CONF
So um a b and there's two of them.
So we're going to say by definition and symmetry of
NOTE CONF
the dot product.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to give you a slight.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What should we do next?
NOTE CONF
Can anyone think of anything that might help us here?
It is visible.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Let's use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
NOTE CONF
Um, so of course, is what inequality is going to
tell me.
NOTE CONF
This is less than or equal to, which is fine.
I'm trying to prove a less than or equals.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to touch the A or the B
squared, but what's my middle term going to be less
NOTE CONF
than or equal to.
Good to a b.
NOTE CONF
Brilliant.
So this is by Cauchy-Schwarz.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then can anyone see how we can finish this
NOTE CONF
up actually.
We're on the last line.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
This is actually a perfect square.
So this is the norm of a plus the norm
NOTE CONF
of B squared.
You'd then get a squared plus 2ABB squared.
NOTE CONF
Good.
And then actually if I take the square roots of
NOTE CONF
both sides I get the triangle inequality Quality.
Woo hoo!
NOTE CONF
So I can draw a little square and say I'm
done.
NOTE CONF
There you go.
There is a complete proof.
NOTE CONF
We defined everything we wanted we had to use.
We justified each step by saying what we used.
NOTE CONF
But essentially it was just one big calculation.
Um, and that proves triangle inequality, which is quite a
NOTE CONF
fun thing.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Any questions on that or thoughts.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
On my last line with somebody please.
Um, so.
NOTE CONF
This equal sign here, this thing here is exactly equal
to that.
NOTE CONF
So we are going to keep the equal sign there.
But we've proved overall this thing is an equal to
NOTE CONF
this thing.
It's less than or equal because we made the less
NOTE CONF
than or equal assumption there.
Um, that's a good question though.
NOTE CONF
I mean, yes, you could put a less than or
equal sign there, but it's just always equal.
NOTE CONF
So you probably should put it in equal sign.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anything else?
goes.
NOTE CONF
Hokey pokey.
Um, so, uh, let us return just for a second,
NOTE CONF
then to the cosine rule and look at a third
consequence of the cosine rule.
NOTE CONF
Um, what happens if, um, my angle is pi by
two?
NOTE CONF
What does that mean for.
These two things.
NOTE CONF
So one of the things we saw in the textbook
we got from here was that the the a, b,
NOTE CONF
we could rearrange the cosine rule and get the norm
of A times the norm of b times cos theta.
NOTE CONF
So if my angle is pi by two.
What is my dot product.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Zero.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So this is a kind of big thing about orthogonality,
NOTE CONF
which is how many people have heard the word orthogonal
before this week.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Some of you.
NOTE CONF
How many people have heard the word perpendicular?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Most of you.
Um, so you've got to love maths.
NOTE CONF
You learn a technical word and then we upgrade it.
Perpendicular gets upgraded to orthogonal.
NOTE CONF
They're essentially the same thing.
Um, they just mean the angle is they're at a
NOTE CONF
right angle to each other.
So if you are perpendicular orthogonal, we will talk a
NOTE CONF
lot more about orthogonality in the rest of the term.
Um, if your particular orthogonal then your dot product has
NOTE CONF
to be zero because your angle is pi by two.
And we know that the dot product is given by
NOTE CONF
the norms times cause.
Okay, so let's do one more question.
NOTE CONF
Um, that's not the question I wanted.
This is the question I wanted.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you cannot see that, uh, A, B and
C are going to be unit vectors with a b
NOTE CONF
equals zero.
So a and B are orthogonal.
NOTE CONF
Can you find can there be um a way of
writing a plus b plus c equals zero.
NOTE CONF
So if you think about that that means you're going
to follow the three vectors around and end up back
NOTE CONF
where you began.
So I'm going to give you have a chat with
NOTE CONF
your neighbour.
Let's see how long we have here.
NOTE CONF
But can you have a b plus c a plus
b plus c equals zero.
NOTE CONF
If a b equals zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We're half.
We're not halfway.
NOTE CONF
Let's try and get half way a third of the
way.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to give you another 20s.
Oh, we reached the halfway point.
NOTE CONF
Okay, 10s.
Five seconds.
NOTE CONF
Four.
Three.
NOTE CONF
Two.
One.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so.
Oh, this is interesting.
NOTE CONF
50% of you say no.
And then we seem a bit split between.
NOTE CONF
Yes and sometimes.
So let's see what.
NOTE CONF
Let's see what they sometimes say.
When c equals minus a plus b.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
If c equals minus a plus b then yeah that's
NOTE CONF
definitely true.
Good.
NOTE CONF
What about a cannot be zero.
Depends on the vectors.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Uh, given there's no condition for C, we could just
NOTE CONF
let C equal that.
Um.
NOTE CONF
If c is the hypotenuse, if c equals zero.
Uh, okay, let us look at this.
NOTE CONF
Because I be orthogonal.
I mean, the other person said if they were orthogonal
NOTE CONF
to the hypotenuse, it still works.
Um, because the unit vectors length would need to be
NOTE CONF
two unit vectors have angles between 2.3 possible for non
unit vectors.
NOTE CONF
So all of the people for know mention something about
length.
NOTE CONF
Why does does length matter here?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Because these are hypotenuse and it is always greater.
NOTE CONF
Okay good.
So actually lots of everyone.
NOTE CONF
Everyone all the comments were very correct.
Everyone was saying good things.
NOTE CONF
I'm a bit sneaky.
I'm snuck in a word and didn't really, um, yell
NOTE CONF
about it, but it makes a big difference.
Um, it is true if they are not unit vectors.
NOTE CONF
Because then yeah, you take C to be the hypotenuse.
You take C to be minus a minus plus b
NOTE CONF
um minus a minus a plus b.
Um, all everything everyone said was correct.
NOTE CONF
But if we're unit vectors then it doesn't work.
We are breaking.
NOTE CONF
You're essentially saying you've got a unit vector here with
length one, a unit vector here which is orthogonal with
NOTE CONF
length one.
And you have a unit vector here with length one
NOTE CONF
that should you write that should be length root two.
Um, so yeah, it's true, provided I didn't sneak in
NOTE CONF
the tiny little word unit.
Um, so yeah, be careful about quantifying words such as
NOTE CONF
unit.
Um, what would the angle have to be if I
NOTE CONF
had three unit vectors a, b, and c and they
formed a triangle, what were the angle?
NOTE CONF
Have to be 60.
Yeah, Pi by three.
NOTE CONF
Um, what.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Because we then have three equal sides and we need
an equilateral triangle.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Are we all happy there?
Any questions?
NOTE CONF
Comments?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
You know, if if there what are we.
And so maybe.
NOTE CONF
So even if you were in higher dimensions, um, then
you would still be forming a triangle and Pythagoras would
NOTE CONF
still be holding.
You might be having n dimensions, so it might be.
NOTE CONF
A triangle like that.
Right.
NOTE CONF
I mean, this is what?
So kind of like in a sphere like this.
NOTE CONF
Um, then if you added them together, you would buy
the top and tail rule.
NOTE CONF
So if I've got three vectors, the top top to
tip rule says I can add them together by moving
NOTE CONF
one of the vectors to the top of the other
one.
NOTE CONF
So if those are my three unit vectors in the
sphere, even if I moved them to the tip, I'm
NOTE CONF
not going to end up back where.
Yeah, I'm always going to be three vectors are always
NOTE CONF
going to lie in at most three dimensional space, and
it definitely holds for two and three dimensional space.
NOTE CONF
Pythagoras still has to hold.
Pythagoras holds for any dimensions, so it's still unfortunately doesn't
NOTE CONF
work even in higher dimensions.
Anything else?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're going to change topics slightly and move on
NOTE CONF
to straight lines.
So um again hopefully this is something lots of you
NOTE CONF
have seen before.
There are five equations of a straight line.
NOTE CONF
There are five equations.
Some of them are straight lines.
NOTE CONF
Um which ones are straight lines?
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Some of the following are straight lines.
Which ones are straight lines?
NOTE CONF
Have a chat with your neighbour.
I'm going to give you a bit longer to do
NOTE CONF
this one, because some of them are a bit harder.
As.
NOTE CONF
A.
Result of.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to give you 30 more seconds.
Getting lots of voting in about two thirds of the
NOTE CONF
way there.
I'm going to give you another 10s.
NOTE CONF
There was lots of good discussion.
Five seconds.
NOTE CONF
Three seconds.
Two and one.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, we all seem to think the first
one is a straight line, which is a relief.
NOTE CONF
Um, yes, the first one is a straight line.
That's your classic y equals x plus C.
NOTE CONF
That's your probably the first way you saw a straight
line being written.
NOTE CONF
So yes.
Oh good.
NOTE CONF
We also seem quite happy that the second one is
two.
NOTE CONF
This is a game probably something a form you saw
at school.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
So this is possibly a form you saw.
NOTE CONF
Um, I didn't know you could do that.
That's quite fun.
NOTE CONF
Um, did lots of people see that before university?
Equations that look like that?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, it's another common one that we have.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
You're right.
NOTE CONF
Changing my Y to a Z doesn't change anything.
Um, one thing I will say for both of these
NOTE CONF
is, yes, I've written them in terms of x and
Z, but actually Provided you rename your variables correctly.
NOTE CONF
Those would both also be straight lines in however many
dimensions.
NOTE CONF
Even if I had dimension abcd, xyz all 26 dimensions,
the equation y plus four x plus six would still
NOTE CONF
give me a straight line in 26 dimensions.
I probably wouldn't call my dimensions abcdefg.
NOTE CONF
Um, but I could um, and that would still be
a straight line.
NOTE CONF
And similarly for two names are kind of slightly arbitrary.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Higher dimension in higher dimensions.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You're right.
NOTE CONF
In high dimensions, you would also actually need the additional
thing of saying all the other dimensions were equal to
NOTE CONF
zero.
Um, so it would be that equation plus in three
NOTE CONF
dimensions for example z equals zero.
Um but yeah it would, it would define a line
NOTE CONF
provided all the others were fixed.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
We then seem slightly split between 3 and 5.
Remarkably similar voting there.
NOTE CONF
Um, what are we saying there?
They all are.
NOTE CONF
Maybe, I mean, guess.
Good guess.
NOTE CONF
Uh, parametric form for 3D line.
Parametric form?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if we think about this, this is actually a
NOTE CONF
form we've seen loads of, um, if I click on
this, does it get big.
NOTE CONF
No it doesn't.
Um, this is.
NOTE CONF
That is the same as me saying x, y, z
equals t times because someone else read the numbers from
NOTE CONF
behind me.
What's this vector going to be?
NOTE CONF
Good.
And then what am I adding?
NOTE CONF
Perfect.
That is the same as that.
NOTE CONF
It's just instead of writing it case wise, I'm watching
it as a vector and hopefully by now we all
NOTE CONF
happy that that gives us the vector equation of a
line that is the one we have seen probably the
NOTE CONF
most in this course.
How to write a straight line.
NOTE CONF
So good.
Uh, those are equivalent.
NOTE CONF
Um, five I threw in for fun.
Uh, when you go, when you call, you get x
NOTE CONF
and Y.
Only two dimensions.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So, um, this is a form of a straight line
NOTE CONF
that I hadn't actually really come across until I started
looking at equations of a straight line.
NOTE CONF
But if you do that calculation, if you expand out
that determinant, you're going to essentially get if you think
NOTE CONF
about, um, the top row, you're going to get X
times some determinant 2119, which is just going to be
NOTE CONF
a number plus y times some number.
A plus one times some number um equals zero which
NOTE CONF
is the same, which is well really similar to a
kind of y equals mx plus c equation.
NOTE CONF
We've just got x times the number plus y times
the number plus a number.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Um, I've still got five minutes.
NOTE CONF
I don't know if not, when did the time go?
Whoops.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Good point.
NOTE CONF
We're out of time.
Indeed.
NOTE CONF
The last one is also a straight line.
Um, because this is a quiz question.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right.
NOTE CONF
I will see you all tomorrow.
Sorry I didn't lost track of time.
NOTE CONF
Um, yes.
Please leave through this front door.
NOTE CONF
Um.
And tomorrow we will do the cross-product and planes and
NOTE CONF
projections.
Excuse me.
NOTE CONF
Do you know.
When the homework two marks are going to be released?
NOTE CONF
They should be released today.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
But they are not released yet.
Right.
NOTE CONF
They might be, but if not, they will be released
by the end of the day.
NOTE CONF
This is perhaps a polling function, not a free one.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, but there wasn't one on the text.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So in two, in three dimensions.
It could be a straight line.
NOTE CONF
Uh.